---
title: About
---
I was born and raised in Catalonia. In 2020 I finished my BSc in Theoretical Physics at the University of Barcelona, with <a href="{{'/assets/docs/NavarroNuria_TFG.pdf' | relative_url}}" target="_blank">Black Holes in Higher Dimensions</a> as my final thesis, directed by Roberto Emparan. I relocated to study my MSc in Physics at The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. I'm graduating by the end of 2023, my thesis is on the remnants of tidal partial disruption of red giants, with Tsvi Piran as my advisor.

The topics I find most exciting are General Relativity and Quantum Field Theory and I’m interested in pursuing an academic career in High Energy Physics, in particular String Theory and other quantum gravity theories. Check my <a href="{{'/assets/docs/NuriaNavarro_CV.pdf' | relative_url}}" target="_blank">CV</a>.

However, my passion and curiosity goes well beyond physics. Check out my <a href="{{'/notes' | relative_url}}">blog</a> to read some of my thoughts and experiences as I try to navigate life and become a better human, or keep reading about my interests and other projects.

# Interests

## Languages 

I'm a polyglot and a language enthusiast. I could spend hours and hours talking about the relationship between language and culture, the way languages shape our brain, methods for learning... My native tongues are Catalan and Spanish, I'm also fluent in English, Hebrew and Italian, and I can defend myself in Japanese and German.


## Music

I've been playing the piano for as long as I can remember. It's one of my favorite ways of unwinding and expressing my feelings. At some point I considered pursuing a professional career as a pianist, but since one can't do it all, I traded that dream with my future self. I once recorded myself playing <a href="{{'/post/chopin' | relative_url}}">Chopin</a>.


## Books

I'm a true bookworm and book hoarder. Check out my <a href="https://www.goodreads.com/user/show/13779947-n-ria" target="_blank">Goodreads</a> or this small list of my [[Favorite books]]. I am also a writer, but that's a work in progress.


## Handcrafting and drawing

I enjoy crocheting, knitting, pottery, bullet journaling, and all sorts of creative stuff. I like to draw realistic portraits with pencil, and I sometimes experiment with watercolor and digital painting.


## Yoga and Meditation

I practice Ashtanga Yoga since 2021, though I'm still learning how to be consistent and I am only halfway through the primary series. I also practice meditation, not regularly. I completed two Vipassana 10-day courses.


## Activism

I care about my impact on the planet, the animals and the people that surround me, so I try to be mindful about my choices. I am vegan, feminist and I advocate for intersectionality.



# Projects 

- My sister Eva and I have a small company dedicated to handcraft shampoo bars using natural ingredients. I am in charge of the graphic side of things, check out our <a href="https://www.navnasoap.com" target="_blank">Website</a>!
- I once uploaded a <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KZBy_5ne1sI" target="_blank">video</a> on Youtube talking about Melanie Joy's concept of carnism.
